# EVerest TSC Meeting - 27 June 2024

# Attendance

## Voting Members

- [x] (Chair) Marco Möller [Pionix]
- [ ] Cornelius Claussen [Pionix]
- [x] Kai-Uwe Hermann [Pionix]
- [ ] Anton Wöllert [Pionix]
- [x] Moritz Barsnick [Chargebyte]
- [x] Holger Rapp [Qwello]
- [x] S. Shankari [Joint Office of Energy and Transportation]

## Other Attendees
- Robert de Leeuw (Pionix)
- Ralf Gesswein (Pionix)
- James Chapman
- Louis Grassi
- Katie Rischpater
- Hauke Feiertag

# Agenda

- Highlights of the month
- What's New
    - Working Groups Updates - Cloud Communication, Car Communication, EVerest Framework & Tools, RUST & ZVT Support, CI/CD & Testing, General Discussions & QA
- What's Next?
    - Roadmap: Updates OCPP2.01 / 2.1 Timelines, ISO15118 Timeline
    - Upcoming Events
    - Next TSC
- Open discussion (not recorded)

# Action Items
- Send out recording and slides to everest mailing list

# Recording:
- [https://youtu.be/BbaGYBSlWY0](https://youtu.be/BbaGYBSlWY0)

# Notes
Vote about members of the new Vulnerability Management Team took place in the non-public part. Results will be shared in the next TSC meeting.
