# EVerest TSC Meeting - 23 October 2025

# Attendance

## Voting Members

- [x] (Chair) Marco Möller [Pionix]
- [ ] Cornelius Claussen [Pionix]
- [x] Kai-Uwe Hermann [Pionix]
- [x] Piet Gömpel [Pionix]
- [ ] Anton Wöllert [Pionix]
- [x] Moritz Barsnick [Chargebyte] -> vote delegated to Kai
- [x] Holger Rapp [Qwello]
- [ ] S. Shankari [NREL] -> vote delegated to Abby Wheelis 

## Other Attendees
- Abby Wheelis [NREL]
- Martin Litre [Pionix]
- Craig Robert Rodine [Sandia National Labs]
- several others

# Agenda

- Highlights of the month
- What's New
    - Updates - EV Charging SIG, Grid Integration & Energy Management, Cloud Communication, Car Communication, EVerest Framework & Tools, WG Car Comm: MCS
    - Proposal on: OIN - Adding EVerest to the Linux System definition -> go ahead
    - Proposal on: NSF Funding on Project on Safe open Open Source Ecosystem -> GO: Contact: craig
    - Proposal on: EVerest CPO Forum (Working Group) -> GO, much interest, qwello and others would like to join 
 - What's Next?
    - Roadmap: Updates on Timelines
    - Upcoming Events
    - Next TSC
- Open discussion (not recorded)

# Action Items
- Send out recording and slides to EVerest mailing list

# Recording:
- [https://youtu.be/S1bKJMCK_hk](https://youtu.be/S1bKJMCK_hk)
# Notes
Votes done:
- Proposal on: OIN - Adding EVerest to the Linux System definition -> go ahead
- Proposal on: NSF Funding on Project on Safe open Open Source Ecosystem -> GO: Contact: craig
- Proposal on: EVerest CPO Forum (Working Group) -> GO, much interest, qwello and others would like to join

Other:
- 
