# EVerest TSC Meeting - 27 November 2025

# Attendance

## Voting Members

- [x] (Chair) Marco Möller [Pionix]
- [x] Cornelius Claussen [Pionix]
- [x] Kai-Uwe Hermann [Pionix]
- [x] Piet Gömpel [Pionix] (replacing Anton Wöllert temporarily)
- [x] Moritz Barsnick [Chargebyte]
- [ ] Holger Rapp [Qwello] -> vote delegated to to Dima
- [ ] S. Shankari [NREL] -> vote delegated to Abby Wheelis 

## Other Attendees
- Abby Wheelis [NREL]
- Martin Litre [Pionix]
- Craig Robert Rodine [Sandia National Labs]
- Dima [Qwello]
- Yue Xiao
- James [Pionix]
- several others

# Agenda

- Highlights of the month
- EVerest Development Updates
    - Updates - from working groups and on monthly release
    - EVerest accepted as Golden SUT
    - EVerest precertified for Plug and Charge
    - NPM supply chain attack summary
 - Community Proposals
    - Update on OpenInventionNetwork
    - Mono Repo Proposal
    - Update on "Safe open source Ecosystes" Funding application
    - Update on CPO Forum
    - Update on Roadmapping PRocess
- What Else
    - Event recap
    - Upcoming Events
    - Next TSC
- Open discussion (not recorded)

# Action Items
- Send out recording and slides to EVerest mailing list

# Recording:
- [https://youtu.be/Bw9BruuNcKk](https://youtu.be/Bw9BruuNcKk)

# Notes
Votes done:
- Proposal on: Nonorepo -> GO

Other:
- 
