# EVerest TSC Meeting - 18 December 2025

# Attendance

## Voting Members

- [x] (Chair) Marco Möller [Pionix]
- [ ] Cornelius Claussen [Pionix]
- [x] Kai-Uwe Hermann [Pionix]
- [x] Piet Gömpel [Pionix] (replacing Anton Wöllert temporarily)
- [x] Moritz Barsnick [Chargebyte]
- [x] Holger Rapp [Qwello] -> vote delegated to to Dima
- [x] S. Shankari [NREL] -> vote delegated to Abby Wheelis 

## Other Attendees
- Abby Wheelis [NREL]
- Martin Litre [Pionix]
- Craig Robert Rodine [Sandia National Labs]
- several others

# Agenda

- Highlights of the month
- EVerest Development Updates
    - Updates - from working groups and on monthly release
 - Community Proposals
    - Stabilized Main Proposal
    - Release Plan Proposal
    - Update on Roadmapping Process
- What Else
    - Event recap
    - EVerest CPO Forum Kickoff
    - Upcoming Events
    - Next TSC
- Open discussion (not recorded)

# Action Items
- Send out recording and slides to EVerest mailing list

# Recording:
- [https://youtu.be/5sivUyI3aMo](https://youtu.be/5sivUyI3aMo)

# Notes
Votes done:
- Proposal on: Stabilized Main -> Accepted to move forwards
- Proposal on: Release Plan / Versioning -> Accepted to move forwards

Other:
- 
