# EVerest TSC Meeting - 26 February 2026

# Attendance

## Voting Members

- [x] (Chair) Marco Möller [Pionix]
- [ ] Cornelius Claussen [Pionix]
- [x] Kai-Uwe Hermann [Pionix]
- [x] Piet Gömpel [Pionix] (replacing Anton Wöllert temporarily)
- [x] Moritz Barsnick [Chargebyte]
- [x] Holger Rapp [Qwello] -> vote delegated to to Dima
- [x] S. Shankari [NREL]

## Other Attendees
- Martin Litre [Pionix]
- several others

# Agenda

- Highlights of the month
- EVerest Development Updates
    - Updates - from working groups and on monthly release
 - Community Proposals
    - Update on OIN application
    - Discussion on AI contributions
    - Discussion on opening up PR triage call 
- What Else
    - Recap CPO Forum
    - Upcoming Events
    - Next TSC
- Open discussion (not recorded)

# Action Items
- Send out recording and slides to EVerest mailing list

# Recording:
- [https://youtu.be/I4tSQSUti1k ](https://youtu.be/I4tSQSUti1k )

# Notes
Votes done:
 - none
Other:
- 
